[Diagnostics][dotnet-trace] Add collect-linux verb (#47894)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**This article applies to:** ✔️ `dotnet-trace` 9.0.661903 and later versions
```

* Is a cross-platform .NET Core tool.
* Enables the collection of .NET Core traces of a running process without a native profiler.
* Is built on [`EventPipe`](./eventpipe.md) of the .NET Core runtime.
* Supports two different ways of collecting traces:
  - The [`collect` verb](#dotnet-trace-collect) offers consistent functionality on any OS
  - The [`collect-linux` verb](#dotnet-trace-collect-linux) uses Linux-specific OS capabilities to provide additional features

|                                          | collect  | collect-linux                     |
|------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------------|
| Supported OS                             | Any      | Linux only, kernel version >= 6.4 |
| Requires Admin/Root Privilege            | No       | Yes                               |
| Trace all processes simultaneously       | No       | Supported                         |
| Capture native library and kernel events | No       | Supported                         |

> | Event callstacks include native frames   | No       | Yes                               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Supports two different ways of collecting traces:

  - The [`collect` verb](#dotnet-trace-collect) offers consistent functionality on any OS.
  - The [`collect-linux` verb](#dotnet-trace-collect-linux) uses Linux-specific OS capabilities to provide additional features.

  | Characteristic                           | `collect` | `collect-linux`                  |
  |------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------------|
  | Supported OS                             | Any      | Linux only, kernel version >= 6.4 |
  | Requires Admin/Root Privilege            | No       | Yes                               |
  | Trace all processes simultaneously       | No       | Supported                         |
  | Capture native library and kernel events | No       | Supported                         |
  | Event callstacks include native frames   | No       | Yes                               |
```

* Is a cross-platform .NET Core tool.
* Enables the collection of .NET Core traces of a running process without a native profiler.
* Is built on [`EventPipe`](./eventpipe.md) of the .NET Core runtime.
* Delivers the same experience on Windows, Linux, and macOS.

> * Offers an additional command on Linux to collect Linux perf events.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

### Synopsis

```dotnetcli
dotnet-trace collect
    [--buffersize <size>]
    [--clreventlevel <clreventlevel>]
    [--clrevents <clrevents>]
    [--dsrouter <ios|ios-sim|android|android-emu>]
    [--format <Chromium|NetTrace|Speedscope>]
    [-h|--help]
    [--duration dd:hh:mm:ss]
    [-n, --name <name>]
    [--diagnostic-port]
    [-o|--output <trace-file-path>]
    [-p|--process-id <pid>]
    [--profile <profile-name>]
    [--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>]
    [-- <command>] (for target applications running .NET 5 or later)
    [--show-child-io]
    [--resume-runtime]
    [--stopping-event-provider-name <stoppingEventProviderName>]
    [--stopping-event-event-name <stoppingEventEventName>]
    [--stopping-event-payload-filter <stoppingEventPayloadFilter>]

>     [--event-filters <list-of-comma-separated-event-filters>]

Author: Removed

  > [!NOTE]
  > On Linux and macOS, using this option requires the target application and `dotnet-trace` to share the same `TMPDIR` environment variable. Otherwise, the command will time out.

- **`--profiles <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

  A comma-separated list of named, pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. The union of profiles and providers will be in effect.

  Default behavior (when `--profiles`, `--providers`, and `--clrevents` are omitted): dotnet-trace enables a useful, low-overhead composition: `dotnet-common` + `dotnet-thread-time`.

  Available profiles:

  | Profile | Description |
  |---------|-------------|

>   |`dotnet-common`|Lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics (GC, JIT, loader/assembly loader, threading, contention). Designed to stay low overhead.|

Author: Using a makeshift powershell script to analyze events enabled through a combination of keywords with a summary of cumulative events based on Level (using ClrEtwAll.man)

I trimmed some of the keywords, which slightly decreases the number of manifest prescribed events (the actual number of events should be further decreased because it seems some keywords are supplemental to emit more instances of an event. e.g. EndEnumerationKeyword doesn't directly enable a unique event, but enables emitting more method events.

Here's the summary generated by the pwsh script where
PerfView's default will enable 118 unique events (verbose level)
Proposed default will enable 84 unique events (informational level)

Using the eShop .NET Aspire app on Windows DevBox
Taking a trace of the Catalog.API subprocess with the proposed default
`dotnet-trace collect -p 15072 --providers "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:0xB881D:4" --duration 00:01:00` while constantly hitting the endpoint `api/catalog/items?PageSize=5&PageIndex=0&api-version=1.0` generates a 30.88MB trace. 
Taking the same trace without hitting the endpoint generates a 22.13MB trace

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PerfView's Default (Uses Verbose keyword)

## Global Level Summary

**Keywords:** AppDomainResourceManagementKeyword | AssemblyLoaderKeyword | CodeSymbolsKeyword | CompilationKeyword | ContentionKeyword | EndEnumerationKeyword | ExceptionKeyword | GCHeapAndTypeNamesKeyword | GCHeapSurvivalAndMovementKeyword | GCKeyword | JitKeyword | JittedMethodILToNativeMapKeyword | LoaderKeyword | NGenKeyword | OverrideAndSuppressNGenEventsKeyword | SecurityKeyword | StackKeyword | ThreadingKeyword | ThreadTransferKeyword | TypeKeyword = 0x14C14FCCBD

| Level | Cumulative Unique Event Count (level-only) |
|-------|---------------------------------------------|
| win:LogAlways | 1 (1) |
| win:Error | 2 (1) |
| win:Informational | 98 (96) |
| win:Verbose | 118 (20) |

# CLR Default Analysis Keyword Event Listing

This file lists, for each keyword in `default_analysis.txt`, the events enabled (latest version only), grouped by event level. Counts are per level and cumulative per keyword.

Legend: a leading `*` before the keyword name indicates the mask in `default_analysis.txt` does not match the manifest.

Events with a trailing `*` appear under multiple selected keywords (multi-keyword events).

### GC

*Mask:* `0x1`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=23 cumulative=23)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 1 | GCStart_V2 | v2 |
| 2 | GCEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 3 | GCRestartEEEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 4 | GCHeapStats_V2 | v2 |
| 5 | GCCreateSegment_V1 | v1 |
| 6 | GCFreeSegment_V1 | v1 |
| 7 | GCRestartEEBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 8 | GCSuspendEEEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 9 | GCSuspendEEBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 11 | GCCreateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 12 | GCTerminateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 13 | GCFinalizersEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 14 | GCFinalizersBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 25 | GCMarkStackRoots | v0 |
| 26 | GCMarkFinalizeQueueRoots | v0 |
| 27 | GCMarkHandles | v0 |
| 28 | GCMarkOlderGenerationRoots | v0 |
| 35 | GCTriggered | v0 |
| 39 | GCDynamicEvent* | v0 |
| 202 | GCMarkWithType | v0 |
| 204 | GCPerHeapHistory_V3 | v3 |
| 205 | GCGlobalHeapHistory_V4 | v4 |
| 208 | GCLOHCompact | v0 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=7 cumulative=30)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 10 | GCAllocationTick_V4 | v4 |
| 29 | FinalizeObject | v0 |
| 33 | PinObjectAtGCTime | v0 |
| 200 | IncreaseMemoryPressure | v0 |
| 201 | DecreaseMemoryPressure | v0 |
| 203 | GCJoin_V2 | v2 |
| 209 | GCFitBucketInfo | v0 |
</details>

### AssemblyLoader

*Mask:* `0x4`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=7 cumulative=7)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 290 | AssemblyLoadStart | v0 |
| 291 | AssemblyLoadStop | v0 |
| 292 | ResolutionAttempted | v0 |
| 293 | AssemblyLoadContextResolvingHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 294 | AppDomainAssemblyResolveHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 295 | AssemblyLoadFromResolveHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 296 | KnownPathProbed | v0 |
</details>

### Loader

*Mask:* `0x8`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=9 cumulative=9)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 149 | ModuleDCStartV2 | v0 |
| 150 | ModuleDCEndV2 | v0 |
| 151 | DomainModuleLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 152 | ModuleLoad_V3 | v3 |
| 153 | ModuleUnload_V2 | v2 |
| 154 | AssemblyLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 155 | AssemblyUnload_V1 | v1 |
| 156 | AppDomainLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 157 | AppDomainUnload_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### Jit

*Mask:* `0x10`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=10 cumulative=10)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 135 | DCStartCompleteV2* | v0 |
| 136 | DCEndCompleteV2* | v0 |
| 137 | MethodDCStartV2* | v0 |
| 138 | MethodDCEndV2* | v0 |
| 139 | MethodDCStartVerboseV2* | v0 |
| 140 | MethodDCEndVerboseV2* | v0 |
| 141 | MethodLoad_V2* | v2 |
| 142 | MethodUnload_V2* | v2 |
| 143 | MethodLoadVerbose_V2* | v2 |
| 144 | MethodUnloadVerbose_V2* | v2 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=2 cumulative=12)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 145 | MethodJittingStarted_V1 | v1 |
| 146 | MethodJitMemoryAllocatedForCode | v0 |
</details>

### NGen

*Mask:* `0x20`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=10 cumulative=10)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 135 | DCStartCompleteV2* | v0 |
| 136 | DCEndCompleteV2* | v0 |
| 137 | MethodDCStartV2* | v0 |
| 138 | MethodDCEndV2* | v0 |
| 139 | MethodDCStartVerboseV2* | v0 |
| 140 | MethodDCEndVerboseV2* | v0 |
| 141 | MethodLoad_V2* | v2 |
| 142 | MethodUnload_V2* | v2 |
| 143 | MethodLoadVerbose_V2* | v2 |
| 144 | MethodUnloadVerbose_V2* | v2 |
</details>

### StopEnumeration

*Mask:* `0x80`

_No direct events; supplemental keyword influencing other event emission_

### Security

*Mask:* `0x400`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=2 cumulative=2)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 182 | StrongNameVerificationStop_V1 | v1 |
| 184 | AuthenticodeVerificationStop_V1 | v1 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=2 cumulative=4)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 181 | StrongNameVerificationStart_V1 | v1 |
| 183 | AuthenticodeVerificationStart_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### AppDomainResourceManagement

*Mask:* `0x800`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=5 cumulative=5)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 83 | AppDomainMemAllocated | v0 |
| 84 | AppDomainMemSurvived | v0 |
| 85 | ThreadCreated* | v0 |
| 86 | ThreadTerminated* | v0 |
| 87 | ThreadDomainEnter* | v0 |
</details>

### Contention

*Mask:* `0x4000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=3 cumulative=3)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 81 | ContentionStart_V2 | v2 |
| 90 | ContentionLockCreated | v0 |
| 91 | ContentionStop_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### Exception

*Mask:* `0x8000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Error (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 80 | ExceptionThrown_V1 | v1 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=7 cumulative=8)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 250 | ExceptionCatchStart | v0 |
| 251 | ExceptionCatchStop | v0 |
| 252 | ExceptionFinallyStart | v0 |
| 253 | ExceptionFinallyStop | v0 |
| 254 | ExceptionFilterStart | v0 |
| 255 | ExceptionFilterStop | v0 |
| 256 | ExceptionThrownStop | v0 |
</details>

### Threading

*Mask:* `0x10000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=26 cumulative=26)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 11 | GCCreateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 12 | GCTerminateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 40 | WorkerThreadCreate | v0 |
| 41 | WorkerThreadTerminate | v0 |
| 42 | WorkerThreadRetire | v0 |
| 43 | WorkerThreadUnretire | v0 |
| 44 | IOThreadCreate_V1 | v1 |
| 45 | IOThreadTerminate_V1 | v1 |
| 46 | IOThreadRetire_V1 | v1 |
| 47 | IOThreadUnretire_V1 | v1 |
| 48 | ThreadpoolSuspensionSuspendThread | v0 |
| 49 | ThreadpoolSuspensionResumeThread | v0 |
| 50 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadStart | v0 |
| 51 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadStop | v0 |
| 52 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadRetirementStart | v0 |
| 53 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadRetirementStop | v0 |
| 54 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentSample | v0 |
| 55 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentAdjustment | v0 |
| 57 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadWait | v0 |
| 58 | YieldProcessorMeasurement | v0 |
| 59 | ThreadPoolMinMaxThreads | v0 |
| 70 | ThreadCreating* | v0 |
| 71 | ThreadRunning* | v0 |
| 85 | ThreadCreated* | v0 |
| 86 | ThreadTerminated* | v0 |
| 87 | ThreadDomainEnter* | v0 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=7 cumulative=33)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 56 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentStats | v0 |
| 60 | ThreadPoolWorkingThreadCount | v0 |
| 61 | ThreadPoolEnqueue* | v0 |
| 62 | ThreadPoolDequeue* | v0 |
| 63 | ThreadPoolIOEnqueue* | v0 |
| 64 | ThreadPoolIODequeue* | v0 |
| 65 | ThreadPoolIOPack | v0 |
</details>

### JittedMethodILToNativeMap

*Mask:* `0x20000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 190 | MethodILToNativeMap_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### SupressNGen

*Mask:* `0x40000`

_No direct events; supplemental keyword influencing other event emission_

### Type

*Mask:* `0x80000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 15 | BulkType | v0 |
</details>

### GCHeapSurvivalAndMovement

*Mask:* `0x400000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=4 cumulative=4)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 21 | GCBulkSurvivingObjectRanges | v0 |
| 22 | GCBulkMovedObjectRanges | v0 |
| 23 | GCGenerationRange | v0 |
| 39 | GCDynamicEvent* | v0 |
</details>

### GCHeapAndTypeNames

*Mask:* `0x1000000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 39 | GCDynamicEvent* | v0 |
</details>

### Stack

*Mask:* `0x40000000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:LogAlways (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 82 | CLRStackWalk | v0 |
</details>

### ThreadTransfer

*Mask:* `0x80000000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=2 cumulative=2)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 70 | ThreadCreating* | v0 |
| 71 | ThreadRunning* | v0 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=4 cumulative=6)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 61 | ThreadPoolEnqueue* | v0 |
| 62 | ThreadPoolDequeue* | v0 |
| 63 | ThreadPoolIOEnqueue* | v0 |
| 64 | ThreadPoolIODequeue* | v0 |
</details>

### Codesymbols

*Mask:* `0x400000000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 260 | CodeSymbols | v0 |
</details>

### Compilation

*Mask:* `0x1000000000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=5 cumulative=5)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 280 | TieredCompilationSettings | v0 |
| 281 | TieredCompilationPause | v0 |
| 282 | TieredCompilationResume | v0 |
| 283 | TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStart | v0 |
| 284 | TieredCompilationBackgroundJitStop | v0 |
</details>

## Supplemental Keywords

These keywords do not emit standalone events but influence additional instances or richer payloads of other events when enabled.

- EndEnumerationKeyword
- OverrideAndSuppressNGenEventsKeyword

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# Proposed Default (Uses Informational Level)

## Global Level Summary

**Keywords:** AppDomainResourceManagementKeyword | AssemblyLoaderKeyword | ExceptionKeyword | GCKeyword | JitKeyword | JittedMethodILToNativeMapKeyword | LoaderKeyword | ThreadingKeyword | TypeKeyword = 0xB881D

| Level | Cumulative Unique Event Count (level-only) |
|-------|---------------------------------------------|
| win:Error | 1 (1) |
| win:Informational | 84 (83) |
| win:Verbose | 101 (17) |

# CLR Default Analysis Keyword Event Listing

This file lists, for each keyword in `default_analysis.txt`, the events enabled (latest version only), grouped by event level. Counts are per level and cumulative per keyword.

Legend: a leading `*` before the keyword name indicates the mask in `default_analysis.txt` does not match the manifest.

Events with a trailing `*` appear under multiple selected keywords (multi-keyword events).

### GC

*Mask:* `0x1`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=23 cumulative=23)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 1 | GCStart_V2 | v2 |
| 2 | GCEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 3 | GCRestartEEEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 4 | GCHeapStats_V2 | v2 |
| 5 | GCCreateSegment_V1 | v1 |
| 6 | GCFreeSegment_V1 | v1 |
| 7 | GCRestartEEBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 8 | GCSuspendEEEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 9 | GCSuspendEEBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 11 | GCCreateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 12 | GCTerminateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 13 | GCFinalizersEnd_V1 | v1 |
| 14 | GCFinalizersBegin_V1 | v1 |
| 25 | GCMarkStackRoots | v0 |
| 26 | GCMarkFinalizeQueueRoots | v0 |
| 27 | GCMarkHandles | v0 |
| 28 | GCMarkOlderGenerationRoots | v0 |
| 35 | GCTriggered | v0 |
| 39 | GCDynamicEvent | v0 |
| 202 | GCMarkWithType | v0 |
| 204 | GCPerHeapHistory_V3 | v3 |
| 205 | GCGlobalHeapHistory_V4 | v4 |
| 208 | GCLOHCompact | v0 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=7 cumulative=30)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 10 | GCAllocationTick_V4 | v4 |
| 29 | FinalizeObject | v0 |
| 33 | PinObjectAtGCTime | v0 |
| 200 | IncreaseMemoryPressure | v0 |
| 201 | DecreaseMemoryPressure | v0 |
| 203 | GCJoin_V2 | v2 |
| 209 | GCFitBucketInfo | v0 |
</details>

### AssemblyLoader

*Mask:* `0x4`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=7 cumulative=7)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 290 | AssemblyLoadStart | v0 |
| 291 | AssemblyLoadStop | v0 |
| 292 | ResolutionAttempted | v0 |
| 293 | AssemblyLoadContextResolvingHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 294 | AppDomainAssemblyResolveHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 295 | AssemblyLoadFromResolveHandlerInvoked | v0 |
| 296 | KnownPathProbed | v0 |
</details>

### Loader

*Mask:* `0x8`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=9 cumulative=9)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 149 | ModuleDCStartV2 | v0 |
| 150 | ModuleDCEndV2 | v0 |
| 151 | DomainModuleLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 152 | ModuleLoad_V3 | v3 |
| 153 | ModuleUnload_V2 | v2 |
| 154 | AssemblyLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 155 | AssemblyUnload_V1 | v1 |
| 156 | AppDomainLoad_V1 | v1 |
| 157 | AppDomainUnload_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### Jit

*Mask:* `0x10`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=10 cumulative=10)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 135 | DCStartCompleteV2 | v0 |
| 136 | DCEndCompleteV2 | v0 |
| 137 | MethodDCStartV2 | v0 |
| 138 | MethodDCEndV2 | v0 |
| 139 | MethodDCStartVerboseV2 | v0 |
| 140 | MethodDCEndVerboseV2 | v0 |
| 141 | MethodLoad_V2 | v2 |
| 142 | MethodUnload_V2 | v2 |
| 143 | MethodLoadVerbose_V2 | v2 |
| 144 | MethodUnloadVerbose_V2 | v2 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=2 cumulative=12)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 145 | MethodJittingStarted_V1 | v1 |
| 146 | MethodJitMemoryAllocatedForCode | v0 |
</details>

### AppDomainResourceManagement

*Mask:* `0x800`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=5 cumulative=5)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 83 | AppDomainMemAllocated | v0 |
| 84 | AppDomainMemSurvived | v0 |
| 85 | ThreadCreated* | v0 |
| 86 | ThreadTerminated* | v0 |
| 87 | ThreadDomainEnter* | v0 |
</details>

### Exception

*Mask:* `0x8000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Error (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 80 | ExceptionThrown_V1 | v1 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=7 cumulative=8)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 250 | ExceptionCatchStart | v0 |
| 251 | ExceptionCatchStop | v0 |
| 252 | ExceptionFinallyStart | v0 |
| 253 | ExceptionFinallyStop | v0 |
| 254 | ExceptionFilterStart | v0 |
| 255 | ExceptionFilterStop | v0 |
| 256 | ExceptionThrownStop | v0 |
</details>

### Threading

*Mask:* `0x10000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=26 cumulative=26)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 11 | GCCreateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 12 | GCTerminateConcurrentThread_V1* | v1 |
| 40 | WorkerThreadCreate | v0 |
| 41 | WorkerThreadTerminate | v0 |
| 42 | WorkerThreadRetire | v0 |
| 43 | WorkerThreadUnretire | v0 |
| 44 | IOThreadCreate_V1 | v1 |
| 45 | IOThreadTerminate_V1 | v1 |
| 46 | IOThreadRetire_V1 | v1 |
| 47 | IOThreadUnretire_V1 | v1 |
| 48 | ThreadpoolSuspensionSuspendThread | v0 |
| 49 | ThreadpoolSuspensionResumeThread | v0 |
| 50 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadStart | v0 |
| 51 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadStop | v0 |
| 52 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadRetirementStart | v0 |
| 53 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadRetirementStop | v0 |
| 54 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentSample | v0 |
| 55 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentAdjustment | v0 |
| 57 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadWait | v0 |
| 58 | YieldProcessorMeasurement | v0 |
| 59 | ThreadPoolMinMaxThreads | v0 |
| 70 | ThreadCreating | v0 |
| 71 | ThreadRunning | v0 |
| 85 | ThreadCreated* | v0 |
| 86 | ThreadTerminated* | v0 |
| 87 | ThreadDomainEnter* | v0 |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=7 cumulative=33)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 56 | ThreadPoolWorkerThreadAdjustmentStats | v0 |
| 60 | ThreadPoolWorkingThreadCount | v0 |
| 61 | ThreadPoolEnqueue | v0 |
| 62 | ThreadPoolDequeue | v0 |
| 63 | ThreadPoolIOEnqueue | v0 |
| 64 | ThreadPoolIODequeue | v0 |
| 65 | ThreadPoolIOPack | v0 |
</details>

### JittedMethodILToNativeMap

*Mask:* `0x20000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Verbose (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 190 | MethodILToNativeMap_V1 | v1 |
</details>

### Type

*Mask:* `0x80000`

<details>
<summary>Level: win:Informational (count=1 cumulative=1)</summary>

| ID | Event Name | Version |
|----|------------|---------|
| 15 | BulkType | v0 |
</details>

>   |`dotnet-common`|Lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics (GC, JIT, loader/assembly loader, threading, contention). Designed to stay low overhead.|

Author: The traces were collected from a long running eshop app. Restarting the eShop app and collect traces with the proposed keywords+Informational level with constant requests generated a 29.11MB trace, and without requests was 11.17MB

  |`dotnet-thread-time`|Samples .NET thread stacks (~100 Hz) to identify hotspots over time. Uses the runtime sample profiler with managed stacks.|
  |`gc-verbose`|Tracks GC collections and samples object allocations.|
  |`gc-collect`|Tracks GC collections only at very low overhead.|

> 

Reviewer 3: We probably want some note here saying that profile formerly named cpu-sampling was renamed to make it more accurate.

  > [!NOTE]
  > On Linux and macOS, using this option requires the target application and `dotnet-trace` to share the same `TMPDIR` environment variable. Otherwise, the command will time out.

- **`--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

>   A comma-separated list of named, pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.

Author: Thanks for point it out, first defined what a profile is in this context, and then mentioned how to specify multiple.

  > [!NOTE]
  > On Linux and macOS, using this option requires the target application and `dotnet-trace` to share the same `TMPDIR` environment variable. Otherwise, the command will time out.

- **`--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

>   In this context, a profile is a pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  A profile is a pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.
```

  When `--profile`, `--providers`, and `--clrevents` are all omitted, `dotnet-trace collect` enables profiles `dotnet-common` and `dotnet-sampled-thread-time` by default.

  Available profiles:

  | Profile | Description |
  |---------|-------------|
  |`dotnet-common`|Lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics designed to stay low overhead.<br>Includes GC, AssemblyLoader, Loader, JIT, Exceptions, Threading, JittedMethodILToNativeMap, and Compilation events<br>Equivalent to `--providers "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:0x100003801D:4"`.|
  |`dotnet-sampled-thread-time`|Samples .NET thread stacks (~100 Hz) to identify hotspots over time. Uses the runtime sample profiler with managed stacks.|
  |`gc-verbose`|Tracks GC collections and samples object allocations.|
  |`gc-collect`|Tracks GC collections only at very low overhead.|
  |`database`|Captures ADO.NET and Entity Framework database commands.|

  > [!NOTE]

>   > In past versions of the dotnet-trace tool, the collect verb supported a profile called `cpu-sampling`. This profile was removed because the name was misleading. It sampled all threads regardless of their CPU usage. You can achieve a similar result now using `--profile dotnet-sampled-thread-time,dotnet-common`. If you need to match the former `cpu-sampling` behavior exactly use `--profile dotnet-sampled-thread-time --providers "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:0x14C14FCCBD:4"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  > In past versions of the dotnet-trace tool, the collect verb supported a profile called `cpu-sampling`. This profile was removed because the name was misleading. It sampled all threads regardless of their CPU usage. You can achieve a similar result now using `--profile dotnet-sampled-thread-time,dotnet-common`. If you need to match the former `cpu-sampling` behavior exactly, use `--profile dotnet-sampled-thread-time --providers "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:0x14C14FCCBD:4"`.
```

> - When specifying a stopping event through the `--stopping-event-*` options, as the EventStream is being parsed asynchronously, there will be some events that pass through between the time a trace event matching the specified stopping event options is parsed and the EventPipeSession is stopped.

## dotnet-trace collect-linux

Collects diagnostic traces using perf_events, a Linux OS technology. `collect-linux` requires admin privileges to capture kernel- and user-mode events, and by default, captures events from all processes.

This Linux-only command includes the same .NET events as [`dotnet-trace collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect), and it uses the kernel’s user_events mechanism to emit .NET events as perf events, enabling unification of user-space .NET events with kernel-space system events.

### Default collection behavior

When `--profiles`, `--clrevents`, and `--providers` aren’t specified, `collect-linux` enables the default `profile` providing the comprehensive composition:

- `dotnet-common` — lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics.

> - `dotnet-thread-time` — runtime thread stack sampling.

Author: Removed from the `collect-linux` set of profiles. I think we will need some specifier for `dotnet-trace list-profiles` to delimit which profiles are valid for `collect` vs `collect-linux`.

- `kernel-cpu` — kernel CPU sampling (perf-based) via `Universal.Events/cpu`.
- `kernel-cswitch` — kernel context switches via `Universal.Events/cswitch` for on/off-CPU analysis.

> By default, a machine-wide trace will be collected. .NET Processes are discovered through their diagnostics ports, which are located under the `TMPDIR` environment variable when set and otherwise under `/tmp`. `dotnet-trace` will need to share the same `TMPDIR` value as .NET Processes of interest, otherwise events will not be collected from those processes.

Author: Asked Beau offline, it should be able to discover diagnostics ports for all .NET processes regardless of whether they have differing TMPDIRs or not.

If collecting events from all .NET Processes is undesired, `-n, --name <name>` or `-p|--process-id <PID>` can be used to specify a particular process. **NOTE**: Should the target application have a `TMPDIR` enviornment variable set, `dotnet-trace` will need to share the same `TMPDIR` value, otherwise events will not be collected from the target application.

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel with `CONFIG_USER_EVENTS=y` support (kernel 6.4+)
- Root permissions
- .NET 10+

### Synopsis

```dotnetcli
dotnet-trace collect-linux
    [-h|--help]

    # Provider/Event Specification
    [--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>]
    [--clreventlevel <clreventlevel>]
    [--clrevents <clrevents>]

>     [--perf-event-tracepoints <list-of-perf-event-tracepoints>]

Author: Renamed to just `perf_events` thanks for the clarification!

  You can read about the CLR provider more in detail on the [.NET runtime provider reference documentation](../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md).

- **`--perf-event-tracepoints <list-of-perf-event-tracepoints>`**

  A comma-separated list of kernel perf event tracepoints to include in the trace. Available kernel events can be found under tracefs, which is typically mounted at `/sys/kernel/tracing`, through `available_events` for all available tracepoints or through the `events/` subdirectory for categorized events.

  Example: `--perf-event-tracepoints syscalls:sys_enter_execve,sched:sched_switch,sched:sched_wakeup`

- **`--profiles <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

  A named, pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. You can specify multiple profiles as a comma-separated list. When multiple profiles are specified, the providers and settings are combined (union), and duplicates are ignored.

  Available profiles:

  | Profile | Description |
  |---------|-------------|
  |`dotnet-common`|Lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics (GC, JIT, loader/assembly loader, threading, contention). Designed to stay low overhead.|

>   |`dotnet-thread-time`|Samples .NET thread stacks (~100 Hz) to identify hotspots over time. Uses the runtime sample profiler with managed stacks.|

Reviewer 3: This one won't be useful for collect-linux.

  |`kernel-cpu`|Kernel CPU sampling (perf-based), emitted as `Universal.Events/cpu`, for precise on-CPU attribution.|
  |`kernel-cswitch`|Kernel thread context switches, emitted as `Universal.Events/cswitch`, for on/off-CPU and scheduler analysis.|

>   |`kernel-precise-thread-time`|Combines `kernel-cpu` + `kernel-cswitch` for a precise thread-time view using kernel events only.|

Reviewer 3: I think we can get rid of this if we already have both kernel-cpu and kernel-cswitch

  |`gc-verbose`|Tracks GC collections and samples object allocations.|
  |`gc-collect`|Tracks GC collections only at very low overhead.|

  > [!NOTE]

>   > The former default `cpu-sampling` profile is now named as `dotnet-thread-time`.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need this note here, collect-linux didn't exist to support the old name and I don't think we should support it under the new name either.

- **`--format {Chromium|NetTrace|Speedscope}`**

  Sets the output format for the trace file conversion. The default is `NetTrace`.

- **`-o|--output <trace-file-path>`**

  The output path for the collected trace data. If not specified it defaults to `<appname>_<yyyyMMdd>_<HHmmss>.nettrace`, for example, `myapp_20210315_111514.nettrace``.

- **`--duration <time-to-run>`**

  The time for the trace to run. Use the `dd:hh:mm:ss` format. For example `00:00:00:05` will run it for 5 seconds.

#### .NET Process Target Options

See [Default collection behavior](#default-collection-behavior)

- **`-n, --name <name>`**

  The name of the process to collect the trace from.

  > [!NOTE]
  > Should the target application have a `TMPDIR` enviornment variable set, `dotnet-trace` will need to share the same `TMPDIR` value, otherwise events will not be collected from the target application.

- **`-p|--process-id <PID>`**

  The process ID to collect the trace from.

  > [!NOTE]
  > Should the target application have a `TMPDIR` enviornment variable set, `dotnet-trace` will need to share the same `TMPDIR` value, otherwise events will not be collected from the target application.

> - **`-- <command>`**

Reviewer 3: This may not be trivial to implement. I think its fine if we don't have it. For the collect verb this was important because it wasn't easy to trace a process from startup otherwise. With collect-linux being process-wide by default it shouldn't be hard for users to start a trace, then start their process of interest.

Author: Removed from collect-linux

  After the collection configuration parameters, the user can append `--` followed by a command to start a .NET application. This may be helpful when diagnosing issues that happen early in the process, such as startup performance issue or assembly loader and binder errors.

> - **`--show-child-io`**

Reviewer 3: If you wind up not having the -- command support then you also won't need this.

  Only applicable when `-- <command>` is used. Shows the input and output streams of a launched child process in the current console.

> [!NOTE]

> > - Stopping the trace may take a long time (up to minutes) for large applications. The runtime needs to send over the type cache for all managed code that was captured in the trace.

Reviewer 3: Is this true? We haven't been using rundown so far. I remember it came up discussion recently but I didn't recall any conclusion whether we needed to be turning it on.

> - When specifying a stopping event through the `--stopping-event-*` options, as the EventStream is being parsed asynchronously, there will be some events that pass through between the time a trace event matching the specified stopping event options is parsed and the EventPipeSession is stopped.

## dotnet-trace collect-linux

> [!NOTE]
> The collect-linux verb is a new preview feature and relies on an updated version of the .nettrace file format. The latest PerfView release supports these trace files but other ways of using the trace file may not work yet.

> [!NOTE]

> > Currently supported Linux RIDs are linux-x64 and linux-arm64.

Author: I combined the latter note about convert/report into the first note, and then moved the limitations about rids and added the glibc limitation to requirements

> [!NOTE]
> The generated NetTrace is not fully compatible with [`convert`](#dotnet-trace-convert) and [`report`](#dotnet-trace-report).

Collects diagnostic traces using perf_events, a Linux OS technology. `collect-linux` requires admin privileges to capture kernel- and user-mode events, and by default, captures events from all processes.

> This Linux-only command includes the same .NET events as [`dotnet-trace collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect), and it uses the kernel’s user_events mechanism to emit .NET events as perf events, enabling unification of user-space .NET events with kernel-space system events.

Author: Good point, trimmed this section and added the table

### Default collection behavior

> When `--providers`, `--profile`, `--clrevents`, and `--perf-events` aren’t specified, `collect-linux` enables the default `profile` providing the comprehensive composition:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When `--providers`, `--profile`, `--clrevents`, and `--perf-events` aren’t specified, `collect-linux` enables these profiles by default:

- `dotnet-common` — lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics.
- `cpu-sampling` — kernel CPU sampling.
```

Author: Thanks!

- `dotnet-common` — lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics.
- `cpu-sampling` — kernel CPU sampling (perf-based) via `Universal.Events/cpu`.

> By default, a machine-wide trace will be collected. .NET Processes are discovered through their diagnostics ports, which are located under the `TMPDIR` environment variable when set and otherwise under `/tmp`.

Author: Thanks!

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel with `CONFIG_USER_EVENTS=y` support (kernel 6.4+)
- Root permissions
- .NET 10+

### Synopsis

```dotnetcli
dotnet-trace collect-linux
    [-h|--help]

    # Provider/Event Specification
    [--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>]
    [--clreventlevel <clreventlevel>]
    [--clrevents <clrevents>]
    [--perf-events <list-of-perf-events>]
    [--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>]

    # Trace Collection
    [-o|--output <trace-file-path>]
    [--duration dd:hh:mm:ss]

    # .NET Process Target (Optional)
    [-n, --name <name>]
    [-p|--process-id <pid>]
```

### Options

#### Provider/Event Specification Options

- **`--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>`**

  A comma-separated list of `EventPipe` providers to be enabled. These providers supplement any providers implied by `--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`. If there's any inconsistency for a particular provider, this configuration takes precedence over the implicit configuration from `--profile` and `--clrevents`.

  This list of providers is in the form:

  - `Provider[,Provider]`

>   - `Provider` is in the form: `KnownProviderName[:Flags[:Level][:KeyValueArgs]]`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - `Provider` is in the form: `KnownProviderName[:Flags[:Level[:KeyValueArgs]]]`.
```

  | `threading` | `0x10000` |
  | `jittedmethodiltonativemap` | `0x20000` |
  | `overrideandsuppressngenevents` | `0x40000` |
  | `type` | `0x80000` |
  | `gcheapdump` | `0x100000` |
  | `gcsampledobjectallocationhigh` | `0x200000` |
  | `gcheapsurvivalandmovement` | `0x400000` |
  | `managedheapcollect` | `0x800000` |
  | `gcheapandtypenames` | `0x1000000` |
  | `gcsampledobjectallocationlow` | `0x2000000` |
  | `perftrack` | `0x20000000` |
  | `stack` | `0x40000000` |
  | `threadtransfer` | `0x80000000` |
  | `debugger` | `0x100000000` |
  | `monitoring` | `0x200000000` |
  | `codesymbols` | `0x400000000` |
  | `eventsource` | `0x800000000` |
  | `compilation` | `0x1000000000` |
  | `compilationdiagnostic` | `0x2000000000` |
  | `methoddiagnostic` | `0x4000000000` |
  | `typediagnostic` | `0x8000000000` |
  | `jitinstrumentationdata` | `0x10000000000` |
  | `profiler` | `0x20000000000` |
  | `waithandle` | `0x40000000000` |
  | `allocationsampling` | `0x80000000000` |

  You can read about the CLR provider more in detail on the [.NET runtime provider reference documentation](../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md).

- **`--perf-events <list-of-perf-events>`**

>   A comma-separated list of perf events to include in the trace. Available events can be found under tracefs, which is typically mounted at `/sys/kernel/tracing`, through `available_events` for all available events or through the `events/` subdirectory for categorized events.

Author: Maybe this https://lwn.net/Articles/630526/? There doesn't seem to be a centralized comprehensive doc about it as docs.kernel.org articles just reference it in passing. To my surprise this paper https://www.filesystems.org/docs/tracefs-fast04/index.html is actually different, and has different authors?

  Example: `--perf-events syscalls:sys_enter_execve,sched:sched_switch,sched:sched_wakeup`

- **`--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

>   A comma-separated list of named, pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.

Reviewer 3: A little confusing again, same as mentioned above.

Collects diagnostic traces using perf_events, a Linux OS technology. `collect-linux` enables the following additional features over [`collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect).

|                                          | collect  | collect-linux                     |
|------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------------|
| Supported OS                             | Any      | Linux only, kernel version >= 6.4 |
| Requires Admin/Root Privilege            | No       | Yes                               |
| Trace all processes simultaneously       | No       | Supported                         |
| Capture native library and kernel events | No       | Supported                         |
| Event callstacks include native frames   | No       | Yes                               |

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel with `CONFIG_USER_EVENTS=y` support (kernel 6.4+)
- Root permissions
- .NET 10+

> [!NOTE]
> The current set of supported Linux RIDs is { linux-x64, linux-arm64 }.

> > The underlying trace recording library currently requires glibc 2.35+.

Reviewer 3: This is better but I'd like to push for us to be exhaustive. For each of the 9 supported distros I think we should state what, if any, is the minimum version where this command will work. I recognize it might take some effort to run that down and I'm hoping @mdh1418 can take on the task.

> > The underlying trace recording library currently requires glibc 2.35+.

Author: Through offline feedback, the table is distractingly verbose, and since the set of distros that do not have 2.35+ is just 3, it's simpler to just state the 3. Moreover there was feedback that minimum distro version with 2.35+ is unrelated given the official document of supported distros.

Collects diagnostic traces using perf_events, a Linux OS technology. `collect-linux` enables the following additional features over [`collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect).

|                                          | collect  | collect-linux                     |
|------------------------------------------|----------|-----------------------------------|
| Supported OS                             | Any      | Linux only, kernel version >= 6.4 |
| Requires Admin/Root Privilege            | No       | Yes                               |
| Trace all processes simultaneously       | No       | Supported                         |
| Capture native library and kernel events | No       | Supported                         |
| Event callstacks include native frames   | No       | Yes                               |

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel with `CONFIG_USER_EVENTS=y` support (kernel 6.4+)
- Root permissions
- .NET 10+

> [!NOTE]
> The `collect-linux` verb depends on assets currently available only on linux x64 and linux arm64 environments that have glibc 2.35+.

> > Based on the [official .NET 10 Linux support document](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/release-notes/10.0/supported-os.md#linux), we've found (via Docker official images) that Alpine 3.22, CentOS Stream 9, and Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9 do not satisfy this requirement.

Reviewer: We support any RHEL variant (fedora, centos stream, almalinux, rocky) officially according to the document.

    # Trace Collection
    [-o|--output <trace-file-path>]
    [--duration dd:hh:mm:ss]

    # .NET Process Target (Optional)
    [-n, --name <name>]
    [-p|--process-id <pid>]
```

### Default collection behavior

When `--providers`, `--profile`, `--clrevents`, and `--perf-events` aren’t specified, `collect-linux` enables these profiles by default:

- `dotnet-common` — lightweight .NET runtime diagnostics.
- `cpu-sampling` — kernel CPU sampling.

By default all processes on the machine will be traced. Use `-n, --name <name>` or `-p|--process-id <PID>` to trace only one process.

### Options

#### Provider/Event Specification Options

- **`--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>`**

  A comma-separated list of `EventPipe` providers to be enabled. These providers supplement any providers implied by `--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`. If there's any inconsistency for a particular provider, this configuration takes precedence over the implicit configuration from `--profile` and `--clrevents`.

  This list of providers is in the form:

  - `Provider[,Provider]`
  - `Provider` is in the form: `KnownProviderName[:Flags[:Level[:KeyValueArgs]]]`.

>   - `KeyValueArgs` is in the form: `[key1=value1][;key2=value2]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This list of providers is in the form `Provider[,Provider]`:
  
  - `Provider` is in the form: `KnownProviderName[:Flags[:Level[:KeyValueArgs]]]`
  - `KeyValueArgs` is in the form: `[key1=value1][;key2=value2]`
```

>   To learn more about some of the well-known providers in .NET, refer to [Well-known Event Providers](./well-known-event-providers.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  To learn more about some of the well-known providers in .NET, see [Well-known Event Providers](./well-known-event-providers.md).
```

- **`--clreventlevel <clreventlevel>`**

  Verbosity of CLR events to be emitted. This option only applies when `--clrevents` is specified and not overridden by `--profile` or `--providers`.
  The following table shows the available event levels.

  | String value    | Numeric value |
  | --------------- | :-----------: |
  | `logalways`     |      `0`      |
  | `critical`      |      `1`      |
  | `error`         |      `2`      |
  | `warning`       |      `3`      |
  | `informational` |      `4`      |
  | `verbose`       |      `5`      |

- **`--clrevents <clrevents>`**

>     A list of CLR runtime provider keywords to enable separated by `+` signs. This is a simple mapping that lets you specify event keywords via string aliases rather than their hex values. For example, `dotnet-trace collect-linux --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:3:4` requests the same set of events as `dotnet-trace collect-linux --clrevents gc+gchandle --clreventlevel informational`. If the CLR runtime provider `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` is also enabled through `--providers` or `--profile`, this option will be ignored. The table below shows the list of available keywords:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A list of CLR runtime provider keywords to enable separated by `+` signs. This is a simple mapping that lets you specify event keywords via string aliases rather than their hex values. For example, `dotnet-trace collect-linux --providers Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:3:4` requests the same set of events as `dotnet-trace collect-linux --clrevents gc+gchandle --clreventlevel informational`. If the CLR runtime provider `Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime` is also enabled through `--providers` or `--profile`, this option is ignored. The following table shows the list of available keywords:
```

  | `debugger` | `0x100000000` |
  | `monitoring` | `0x200000000` |
  | `codesymbols` | `0x400000000` |
  | `eventsource` | `0x800000000` |
  | `compilation` | `0x1000000000` |
  | `compilationdiagnostic` | `0x2000000000` |
  | `methoddiagnostic` | `0x4000000000` |
  | `typediagnostic` | `0x8000000000` |
  | `jitinstrumentationdata` | `0x10000000000` |
  | `profiler` | `0x20000000000` |
  | `waithandle` | `0x40000000000` |
  | `allocationsampling` | `0x80000000000` |

  You can read about the CLR provider more in detail on the [.NET runtime provider reference documentation](../../fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-events.md).

- **`--perf-events <list-of-perf-events>`**

  A comma-separated list of perf events to include in the trace. Available events can be found under [tracefs](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/ftrace.html#the-file-system), which is typically mounted at `/sys/kernel/tracing`, through `available_events` for all available events or through the `events/` subdirectory for categorized events.

  Example: `--perf-events syscalls:sys_enter_execve,sched:sched_switch,sched:sched_wakeup`

- **`--profile <list-of-comma-separated-profile-names>`**

>   A profile is a pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  A profile is a predefined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.
```

>   In this context, a profile is a pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  A profile is a pre-defined set of provider configurations for common tracing scenarios. Multiple profiles can be specified at a time, delimited by commas. Providers configured through `--providers` will override the profile's configuration. Similarly, if any profile configures the CLR runtime provider, it will override any configurations prescribed through `--clrevents`.
```

  |`thread-time`|Kernel thread context switches, emitted as `Universal.Events/cswitch`, for on/off-CPU and scheduler analysis.|
  |`gc-verbose`|Tracks GC collections and samples object allocations.|
  |`gc-collect`|Tracks GC collections only at very low overhead.|
  |`database`|Captures ADO.NET and Entity Framework database commands.|

#### Trace Collection Options

- **`-o|--output <trace-file-path>`**

  The output path for the collected trace data. If not specified, it defaults to `trace_<yyyyMMdd>_<HHmmss>.nettrace` for the default machine-wide trace and to `<appname>_<yyyyMMdd>_<HHmmss>.nettrace` for a process-specific trace (`--name` or `--process-id`)

- **`--duration <time-to-run>`**

  The time for the trace to run. Use the `dd:hh:mm:ss` format. For example `00:00:00:05` will run it for 5 seconds.

#### .NET Process Target Options

See [Default collection behavior](#default-collection-behavior)

- **`-n, --name <name>`**

  The name of the process to collect the trace from.

- **`-p|--process-id <PID>`**

  The process ID to collect the trace from.

> [!NOTE]

> > - To collect a trace using `dotnet-trace collect-linux`, it needs to be run with root permissions (`CAP_PERFMON`/`CAP_SYS_ADMIN`). Otherwise, the tool will fail to collect events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> To collect a trace using `dotnet-trace collect-linux`, it needs to be run with root permissions (`CAP_PERFMON`/`CAP_SYS_ADMIN`). Otherwise, the tool will fail to collect events.
```

> - When specifying a stopping event through the `--stopping-event-*` options, as the EventStream is being parsed asynchronously, there will be some events that pass through between the time a trace event matching the specified stopping event options is parsed and the EventPipeSession is stopped.

## dotnet-trace collect-linux

Collects diagnostic traces from .NET applications using Linux user_events as a transport layer. This command provides the same functionality as [`dotnet-trace collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect) but routes .NET runtime events through the Linux kernel's user_events subsystem before writing them to `.nettrace` files.

> This transport approach enables automatic unification of user-space .NET events with kernel-space system events, since both are captured in the same kernel tracing infrastructure. Linux tools like `perf` and `ftrace` can monitor events in real-time while maintaining full compatibility with existing .NET profiling workflows.

Author: Removed, thanks!

### Prerequisites

- Linux kernel with `CONFIG_USER_EVENTS=y` support (kernel 6.4+)

> - Appropriate permissions to access `/sys/kernel/tracing/user_events_data`

Author: Done!

- .NET 10+

### Synopsis

```dotnetcli

> dotnet-trace collect-linux

Reviewer 3: I can conceive of that scenario, but I'm suggesting we don't do anything to proactively support it right now to keep the scope smaller.

    [--buffersize <size>]
    [--clreventlevel <clreventlevel>]
    [--clrevents <clrevents>]
    [--format <Chromium|NetTrace|Speedscope>]
    [-h|--help]
    [--duration dd:hh:mm:ss]
    [-n, --name <name>]
    [--diagnostic-port]
    [-o|--output <trace-file-path>]

>     [-p|--process-id <pid>]

Author: Doesn't dotnet-trace use those to identify which DiagnosticPort to connect and send the IPC Command? If we are just collecting kernel events then that makes sense to not need to specify pid by just. I guess we can collect tracepoints emitted by other .NET apps if we know the tracepoint name, but wouldn't something need to enable their User_events session in the first place?

>     [-p|--process-id <pid>]

Reviewer 3: We are expecting OneCollect to monitor the file system and connect to the default diagnostics port on every .NET process as it starts up.

>     [-p|--process-id <pid>]

Author: Ah, thanks for the reminder, adding some additional signals that these are optional and that by default all .NET processes on the machine are fair game for event collection.

>     [--profile <profile-name>]

Author: I lightly updated the profiles for both collect and collect-linux. Still up for refinement once I have a better understanding of how to mix/match the .NET events and linux perf events. I'm wondering if we should allow `--profiles` if we want to offer several orthogonal profiles and allow customers to mix/match. We already have some logic to mix a profile with the providers/keywords as well.

    [--providers <list-of-comma-separated-providers>]
    [-- <command>] (for target applications running .NET 10 or later)
    [--show-child-io]
    [--resume-runtime]
    [--stopping-event-provider-name <stoppingEventProviderName>]
    [--stopping-event-event-name <stoppingEventEventName>]

>     [--stopping-event-payload-filter <stoppingEventPayloadFilter>]

Author: Right, it also just now occurred to me that when all .NET processes are targeted, its unclear whether from which process the stopping event should stop the trace.

I think if it turns out there are many users that are interested in automatically stopping the trace for some "startup" profiling then we can revisit what that would look like for collect-linux/OneCollect.

    [--event-filters <list-of-comma-separated-event-filters>]
    [--tracepoint-configs <list-of-comma-separated-tracepoint-configs>]
    [--kernel-events <list-of-kernel-events>]
```

### Options

> `dotnet-trace collect-linux` supports all the same options as [`dotnet-trace collect`](#dotnet-trace-collect), excluding `--dsrouter`, and additionally offers:

Author: Right, given that some options from `collect` don't apply to this new verb, just copied applicable options and grouped by functionality.

> - **`--tracepoint-configs <list-of-comma-separated-tracepoint-configs>` (required)**

Author: Done!

  > Use `--event-filters` to disable specific events before they are routed to tracepoints. Event filtering happens before tracepoint routing - only events that pass the filter will be sent to their assigned tracepoints.

  **Examples:**
  ```
  # Scenario: All events from provider go to a default tracepoint
  --tracepoint-configs "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime:dotnet_runtime"
  # All enabled events from Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime will be written to Microsoft_Windows_DotNETRuntime_dotnet_runtime
  
  # Scenario: Split events by categories
  --tracepoint-configs "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime::gc_events=1+2+3;jit_events=10+11+12"
  # EventIDs 1, 2, and 3 will be written to Microsoft_Windows_DotNETRuntime_gc_events
  # EventIDs 10, 11, and 12 will be written to Microsoft_Windows_DotNETRuntime_jit_events

  # Multiple providers (comma-separated)
  --tracepoint-configs "Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime::gc_events=1+2+3,MyCustomProvider:custom_events"
  # EventIds 1, 2, and 3 from Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime will be written to Microsoft_Windows_DotNETRuntime_gc_events
  # All enabled events from MyCustomProvider will be written to MyCustomProvider_custom_events
  ```

> - **`--kernel-events <list-of-kernel-events>` (optional)**

Author: Good point, changed to `perf-event-tracepoints`

> - **`--kernel-events <list-of-kernel-events>` (optional)**

Author: It seems like all events under /sys/kernel/tracing/available_events can be enabled, so I changed the wording to suggest that all of those events found there or found categorically under /sys/kernel/tracing/events/ can be enabled through this option `--perf-event-tracepoints`.

>   A comma-separated list of kernel event categories to include in the trace. These events are automatically grouped into kernel-named tracepoints. Available categories include:

Author: Reworded to focus on individual perf event tracepoints that can be discovered from `/sys/kernel/tracing/available_events` and `/sys/kernel/tracing/events/`

  | Category | Description | Linux Tracepoints |
  |----------|-------------|-------------------|

>   | `syscalls` | System call entry/exit events | `syscalls:sys_enter_*`, `syscalls:sys_exit_*` |

Author: You're right, I do think its easier to start off with specifying each individual tracepoint, and then if OneCollect allows it, we can update `collect-linux`.

  | `sched` | Process scheduling events | `sched:sched_switch`, `sched:sched_wakeup` |
  | `net` | Network-related events | `net:netif_rx`, `net:net_dev_xmit` |
  | `fs` | Filesystem I/O events | `ext4:*`, `vfs:*` |
  | `mm` | Memory management events | `kmem:*`, `vmscan:*` |

> 

Author: For now it seems like the provider will be Universal.Events, so far its not immediately clear to me what field lists will show up, as it doesn't seem like all fields from the tracepoint format will show up. For example, `syscalls:sys_enter_openat` has a format of 
```
name: sys_enter_openat
ID: 681
format:
        field:unsigned short common_type;       offset:0;       size:2; signed:0;
        field:unsigned char common_flags;       offset:2;       size:1; signed:0;
        field:unsigned char common_preempt_count;       offset:3;       size:1; signed:0;
        field:int common_pid;   offset:4;       size:4; signed:1;

        field:int __syscall_nr; offset:8;       size:4; signed:1;
        field:int dfd;  offset:16;      size:8; signed:0;
        field:const char * filename;    offset:24;      size:8; signed:0;
        field:int flags;        offset:32;      size:8; signed:0;
        field:umode_t mode;     offset:40;      size:8; signed:0;

print fmt: "dfd: 0x%08lx, filename: 0x%08lx, flags: 0x%08lx, mode: 0x%08lx", ((unsigned long)(REC->dfd)), ((unsigned long)(REC->filename)), ((unsigned long)(REC->flags)), ((unsigned long)(REC->mode))
```
but the trace event only displays `CellContents: HasStack="True" ThreadID="1,256,121" ProcessorNumber="0" common_type="681" common_flags="0" common_preempt_count="1" common_pid="1,468,505" __syscall_nr="257" dfd="1,835,360,612" `.

> 

Reviewer 3: > For now it seems like the provider will be Universal.Events

There was a bug previously that was putting Universal.Events as a prefix on all events. Are you testing with a build where that was fixed? If Universal.Events is still showing up did I just happen to pick two events that are special cased or it shows up on every event you try? What event names are you seeing after the Universal.Events prefix? I know when I tested the page_fault_user event that showed up in PerfView as "exceptions/page_fault_user" without any Universal.Events prefix.

> 

Reviewer 3: > You're right, for perf_events they will show up with the event category as the provider, like

is it also the case that sched:sched_switch shows up as sched/sched_switch? I am hoping to confirm that nothing is special cased there and OneCollect isn't automatically converting it into Universal.Events/cswitch.

> 

Author: Yes, looks like `sched:sched_switch` and `sched:sched_wakeup` both show up under the sched provider instead of `Universal.Events`. Even if both `--off-cpu` and sched:sched_switch are specified, both `sched/sched_switch` and `Universal.Events/cswitch` will appear and they won't get grouped together

> 

Reviewer 3: The missing fields in you sys_enter_openat example are still odd. I'd suggest asking Beau about it. If there isn't something intentional behind it that sounds like a bug in either OneCollect or TraceEvent that is causing the fields to get lost. We should figure out where to get it fixed.

>   These events correspond to Linux kernel tracepoints documented in the [Linux kernel tracing documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/index.html). For more details on available tracepoints, see [ftrace](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/ftrace.html) and [tracepoints](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/trace/tracepoints.html).

Author: Good point, omitted these details and just mentioned that available kernel events can be found under tracefs' `available_events` or categorically through `events/`

  Example: `--kernel-events syscalls,sched,net`

### Linux Integration

**Tracepoint Configuration Requirements:**

- **Mandatory Mapping**: Every provider must be explicitly mapped to at least a default tracepoint and/or exclusive tracepoint sets via `--tracepoint-configs`
- **Tracepoint Isolation**: Each tracepoint can only receive events from one provider
- **Event Routing**: Different event IDs within a provider can be routed to different tracepoints for granular control
- **Automatic Prefixing**: All tracepoint names are prefixed with the provider name to avoid collisions

**Kernel Integration Points:**

The kernel tracepoints can be accessed through standard Linux tracing interfaces:

- **ftrace**: `/sys/kernel/tracing/events/user_events/`
- **perf**: Use `perf list user_events*` to see available events
- **System monitoring tools**: Any tool that can consume Linux tracepoints

> ### Examples

Reviewer 3: Lower in this doc are some examples of using dotnet-trace collect in various situations. No need just yet, but we'd probably want to update or add to those examples for the collect-linux functionality once we've clarified what it will be.

  The preceding command generates output similar to the following:

  ```output
  No profile or providers specified, defaulting to trace profiles 'dotnet-common' + 'dotnet-sampled-thread-time'.

  Provider Name                           Keywords            Level               Enabled By
  Microsoft-Windows-DotNETRuntime         0x000000100003801D  Informational(4)    --profile
  Microsoft-DotNETCore-SampleProfiler     0x0000F00000000000  Informational(4)    --profile

  Process        : <full-path-to-process-being-trace>
  Output File    : <process>_20251007_154557.nettrace
  [00:00:00:02]   Recording trace 178.172  (KB)
  Press <Enter> or <Ctrl+C> to exit...
  Stopping the trace. This may take several minutes depending on the application being traced.

  Trace completed.
  ```

> - Stop collection by pressing the `<Enter>` key. `dotnet-trace` will finish logging events to the `.nettrace` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Stop collection by pressing the <kbd>Enter</kbd> key. `dotnet-trace` will finish logging events to the `.nettrace` file.
```

    > [!IMPORTANT]
    > Launching your app with `dotnet run` can be problematic because the dotnet CLI may spawn many child processes that are not your app and they can connect to `dotnet-trace` before your app, leaving your app to be suspended at run time. It is recommended you directly use a self-contained version of the app or use `dotnet exec` to launch the application.

> ## (Linux-only) Collect a trace with Linux perf events using dotnet-trace

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## (Linux-only) Collect a machine-wide trace using dotnet-trace
```

Author: Thanks!
